descriptive rules Rules that simply describe the regularities in a pattern of
observations, with no commentary on whether the pattern is “proper,”“correct,” or “desirable.” (Ch. 10)
detector A node within a processing network that fires primarily in response
to a specific target contained within the incoming perceptual information.
diagnostic information Information about a particular case, often contrasted
with base-rate information. (Ch. 12)
dichotic listening A task in which research participants hear two
simultaneous verbal messages—one presented via headphones to the left
ear and a second one presented to the right ear. In typical experiments,
participants are asked to pay attention to one of these inputs (the attended
channel) and are urged to ignore the other (the unattended channel).
(Ch. 5)
digit-span task A task often used for measuring working memory’s storage
capacity. Research participants are read a series of digits (e.g., “8 3 4”)
and must immediately repeat them back. If they do this successfully, they
are given a slightly longer list (e.g., “9 2 4 0”), and so forth. The length
of the longest list a person can remember in this fashion is that person’s
digit span. Also see operation span. (Ch. 6)
direct memory testing A form of memory testing in which people are asked
explicitly to remember some previous event. Recall and standard
recognition testing are both forms of direct memory testing. Often
contrasted with indirect memory testing. (Ch. 7)
distance cues Information available to the perceiver that allows the
perceiver to judge how far off a target object is. (Ch. 3)
distributed representation A mode of representing ideas or contents in
which there is no one node (or specific group of nodes) representing the
content and no one place where the content is stored. Instead, the content
is represented via a pattern of simultaneous activity across many nodes
within a network. The same nodes will also participate in other patterns,
so those nodes will also be part of other distributed representations.
Often contrasted with local representation. (Ch. 4)
divergent thinking An ability to move one’s thoughts in novel, unanticipated
directions. Often contrasted with convergent thinking. (Ch. 13)
divided attention The skill of performing multiple tasks simultaneously. (Ch.
5)double-blind procedure An experimental design in which neither the
research participant nor the person administering the procedure knows
whether the participant is in the experimental or the control group, or
whether a particular trial (or test session) is in the experimental
condition or the control condition. Among other advantages, this step
ensures that there will be no systematic differences between the
conditions in how participants are treated or in participants’ expectations
for the procedure.
double dissociation A pattern of results in which, with some manipulations,
one process or structure is influenced more than a second, but then, with
other manipulations, the second process or structure is influenced more
than the first. With this pattern of results, it is clear that neither structure
or process is simply a “weaker” or “more easily manipulated” version of
the other. Instead, the data pattern tells us that the two structures are
genuinely (and qualitatively) distinct from each other, each governed by
its own principles.
DRM paradigm A commonly used experimental design, named after its
originators (Deese, Roediger, and McDermott), for eliciting and studying
memory errors. In this procedure, a person sees or hears a list of words
that are related to a single theme, however, the word that names the theme
is not itself included. Nonetheless, people are very likely to remember
later that the theme word was presented. (Ch. 8)
dual coding A theory that imageable materials, such as high-imagery words,
will be doubly represented in memory: The word itself will be
remembered, and so will the corresponding mental image. (Ch. 11)
dual-process model Any model of thinking that claims people have two
distinct means of making judgments—one of which is fast, efficient, but
prone to error, and one that is slower, more effortful, but also more
accurate. (Ch. 12)
early selection hypothesis A proposal that selective attention operates at an
early stage of processing, so that the unattended inputs receive little
analysis. (Ch. 5)
edge enhancement A process created by lateral inhibition in which the
neurons in the visual system give exaggerated responses to edges of
surfaces. (Ch. 3)effect size A statistical measure of how large the difference is between two
groups or between two conditions.
eidetic imagery A relatively rare capacity in which the person can retain
long-lasting and detailed visual images of scenes that can be scrutinized
as if they were still physically present. (Ch. 11)
Einstellung This term is sometimes used interchangeably with the term
problem-solving set, but is often used more specifically to refer to a
rigidity that can grow out of early efforts in solving a series of problems.
If these early efforts are successful, the person will likely continue using
the same method, even if there is a seemingly-obvious and much more
efficient solution available for subsequent problems in that series. (Ch.
13)
electroencephalogram (EEG) A recording of voltage changes occurring at
the scalp that reflect activity in the brain underneath. (Ch. 2)
emotional intelligence The ability to understand one’s own and others’
emotions and to control one’s emotions appropriately. (Ch. 14)
encoding specificity The tendency, when memorizing, to place in memory
both the materials to be learned and some amount of their context. As a
result, these materials will be recognized as familiar, later on, only if the
materials appear again in a similar context. (Ch. 7)
endogenous control of attention A mechanism through which a person
chooses (often, on the basis of some meaningful signal) where to focus
attention. (Ch. 5)
event-related potentials Changes in an electroencephalogram (EEG) in the
brief period just before, during, and after an explicitly defined event,
usually measured by averaging together many trials in which this event
has occurred. (Ch. 2)
excitatory connection A link from one node, or one detector, to another,
such that activation of one node activates the other. Often contrasted with
inhibitory connection. (Ch. 4)
executive control The mental resources and processes that are used to set
goals, choose task priorities, and avoid conflict among competing habits
or responses. (Ch. 5)
exemplar-based reasoning Reasoning that draws on knowledge about
specific category members, or exemplars, rather than drawing on moregeneral information about the overall category. (Ch. 9)
exogenous control of attention A mechanism through which attention is
automatically directed, essentially as a reflex response, to some
“attention-grabbing” input. (Ch. 5)
experimental condition A situation or condition that includes the factor the
researcher is trying to evaluate. Usually contrasted with control
condition.
explicit memory A memory revealed by direct memory testing and usually
accompanied by the conviction that one is, in fact, remembering—that is,
drawing on some sort of knowledge (perhaps knowledge about a specific
prior episode, or perhaps more general knowledge). Often contrasted
with implicit memory. (Ch. 7)
external validity The trait of a research study (or even a specific measure)
of reflecting the real-world process or phenomenon that the researcher
hopes to illuminate. A study lacks external validity if people behave
differently within the study than they would in the corresponding
circumstance outside of the study.
extralinguistic context The social and physical setting in which an utterance
is encountered, usually, cues within this setting guide the interpretation of
the utterance. (Ch. 10)
factor analysis A statistical method for studying the interrelations among
various tests. The goal is to discover the extent to which the tests are
influenced by the same factors. (Ch. 14)
familiarity In some circumstances, the subjective feeling that one has
encountered a stimulus before, in other circumstances, the objective fact
that one has indeed encountered a stimulus before and is now in some
way influenced by that encounter, whether or not one recalls that
encounter or feels that the stimulus is familiar. (Ch. 7)
family resemblance The idea that members of a category (e.g., all dogs, all
games) resemble one another. In general, family resemblance relies on
some number of features being shared by any subset of category
members, even though these features may not be shared by all members of
the category. Therefore, the basis for family resemblance may shift from
one subset of the category to another. (Ch. 9)feature integration theory A proposal about the function of attention in
“glueing” together elements and features that are in view. (Ch. 5)
feature nets Systems for recognizing patterns that involve a network of
detectors, with detectors for features serving as the initial layer in each
system. (Ch. 4)
figure/ground organization The processing step in which the perceiver
determines which aspects of the stimulus belong to the central object (or
“figure”) and which aspects belong to the background (or “ground”). (Ch.
3)
filter A hypothetical mechanism that would block potential distractors from
further processing. (Ch. 5)
fixation target A visual mark (e.g., a dot or a plus sign) at which research
participants point their eyes, or fixate. Fixation targets help research
participants to control their eye position. (Ch. 5)
flashbulb memory A memory of extraordinary clarity, typically for some
highly emotional event, that is retained over many years. Despite their
remarkable vividness, flashbulb memories sometimes are inaccurate.
(Ch. 8)
fluent aphasia A disruption of language, caused by brain damage, in which
afflicted individuals are able to produce speech but the speech is not
meaningful, and the individuals are not able to understand what is said to
them. Often contrasted with nonfluent aphasia. (Ch. 10)
fluid intelligence The ability to deal with new and unusual problems. See
also crystallized intelligence. (Ch. 14)
Flynn effect A worldwide increase in IQ scores over the last several
decades, occurring in both impoverished and developed nations, and
proceeding at a rate of roughly 3 points per decade. (Ch. 14)
forebrain One of the three main structures (along with the hindbrain and the
midbrain) of the brain, the forebrain plays a crucial role in supporting
intellectual functioning. (Ch. 2)
four-card task See selection task. (Ch. 12)
fovea The center of the retina and the region on the eye in which acuity is
best, when a person looks at an object, they are lining up that object with
the fovea. (Ch. 3)framing In the context of decision making, a term referring to how the
options for a decision (or, in some cases, the decision itself) are
described. Often, the framing determines whether the decision is cast in
terms of gains or positive attributes (e.g., what you might gain from this
or that option), or whether the decision is cast in terms of losses or
negative attributes. (Ch. 12)
free recall procedure A method used for testing what research participants
remember, participants are given a broad cue (“What happened
yesterday?” or “What words were on the list?”) and then try to name the
relevant items, in any order they choose. It is the flexibility in order that
makes this recall “free.” (Ch. 6)
frequency One of the central influences on a detector’s or node’s activation
level. Frequency refers to whether the detector or node has been
activated often in the past. Often contrasted with recency—whether the
detector or node has been activated in the recent past. Note that this usage
of “frequency” contrasts with the usage of “frequency” within the term
“frequency estimate” (someone’s assessment of how often an event has
occurred in the past or how common an object is in the world).
frequency estimate An essential step in judgment, in which someone makes
an assessment of how often they have experienced or encountered a
particular object or event. (Ch. 12)
frontal lobes The lobe of the brain in each cerebral hemisphere that includes
the prefrontal area and the primary motor projection area. (Ch. 2)
functional fixedness A tendency to be rigid in how one thinks about an
object’s function. This generally involves a strong tendency to think of an
object only in terms of its typical function. (Ch. 13)
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI scan) A neuroimaging
technique that uses magnetic fields to construct a detailed three-
dimensional representation of the activity levels in different areas of the
brain at a particular moment in time. (Ch. 2)
fusiform face area (FFA) A brain area apparently specialized for the
perception of faces. (Ch. 2)
ganglion cells A type of neuron in the eye. The ganglion cells receive their
input from the bipolar cells, and then the axons of the ganglion cellsgather together to form the optic nerve, carrying information back to the
lateral geniculate nucleus. (Ch. 3)
garden-path sentence A sentence that initially leads the reader to one
understanding of how the sentence’s words are related but then requires a
change in this understanding to comprehend the full sentence. Examples
are “The old man ships” and “The horse raced past the barn fell.” (Ch.
10)
general intelligence (g)A mental capacity that is hypothesized as
contributing to the performance of virtually any intellectual task. The
existence of g is documented by the statistical overlap, usually revealed
through factor analysis, among diverse forms of mental testing. (Ch. 14)
generalizability A measure of whether it is legitimate to make claims about
people and situations not involved in a study based on what was
observed within the study.
generativity The trait that enables someone to combine and recombine basic
units to create (or “generate”) new and more complex entities. Linguistic
rules, for example, are generative because they enable a person to
combine and recombine a limited set of words to produce a vast number
of sentences. (Ch. 10)
geons Basic shapes proposed as the building blocks of all complex three-
dimensional forms. Geons take the form of cylinders, cones, blocks, and
the like, and they are combined to form “geon assemblies.” These are
then combined to produce entire objects. (Ch. 4)
Gestalt principles A small number of rules that seem to govern how
observers organize the visual input, grouping some elements together but
perceiving other elements to be independent of one another. (Ch. 3)
glia A type of cell found (along with neurons) in the central nervous system.
Glial cells have many functions, including the support of neurons, the
repair of neural connections in case of damage, and a key role in guiding
the initial development of neural connections. A specialized type of glia
also provide electrical insulation for some neurons, allowing much faster
transmission of neuronal signals. (Ch. 2)
goal neglect A pattern of behavior in which people fail to keep their goal in
mind, so that, for example, they rely on habitual responses even if those
responses will not move them toward the goal. (Ch. 5)graded membership The idea that some members of a category are “better”
members and therefore are more firmly in the category than other
members. (Ch. 9)
heuristic A strategy that is reasonably efficient and works most of the time.
In using a heuristic, the person is choosing to accept some risk of error in
order to gain efficiency. (Ch. 12)
hill-climbing strategy A commonly used strategy in problem solving. If
people use this strategy, then whenever their efforts toward solving a
problem give them a choice, they will choose the option that carries them
closer to the goal. (Ch. 13)
hindbrain One of the three main structures (along with the forebrain and the
midbrain) of the brain, the hindbrain sits atop the spinal cord and
includes several structures crucial for controlling key life functions. (Ch.
2)
hippocampus (pl. hippocampi) A structure in the temporal lobe that is
involved in the creation of long-term memories and spatial memory. (Ch.
2)
holistic perception A process in which the ability to identify an object
depends on the whole, or the entire configuration, rather than on an
inventory of the object’s parts. In holistic perception, the parts do play a
role—but by virtue of creating the patterns that are critical for
recognition. (Ch. 4)
hub and spoke model A proposal for how concepts might be represented in
the brain, with tissue in the anterior temporal lobes serving as the
“hub”—a brain location that connects and integrates information from
many other brain areas. The “spokes” represent more specific elements
of the concept—with (for example) visual information relevant to the
concept stored in visual areas, relevant action information stored in
motor areas, and so on. (Ch. 9)
hypothalamus A small structure at the base of the forebrain that plays a vital
role in the control of motivated behaviors such as eating, drinking, and
sexual activity. (Ch. 2)
ill-defined problem A problem for which the goal state is specified only in
general terms and the operations available for reaching the goal state are
not obvious at the start. (Ch. 13)illumination The third in a series of stages often hypothesized as crucial for
creativity. The first stage is preparation, the second, incubation.
Illumination is the stage in which some new key insight or new idea
suddenly comes to mind and is then (on this hypothesis) followed by
verification. (Ch. 13)
illusion of truth An effect of implicit memory in which claims that are
familiar end up seeming more plausible. (Ch. 7)
image-scanning procedure An experimental procedure in which participants
are instructed to form a specific mental image and then are asked to scan,
with their “mind’s eye,” from one point in the image to another. By timing
these scans, the experimenter can determine how long “travel” takes
across a mental image. (Ch. 11)
implicit memory A memory revealed by indirect memory testing and often
manifested as a priming effect in which current performance is guided or
facilitated by previous experiences. Implicit memories are often
accompanied by no conscious realization that one is, in fact, being
influenced by specific past experiences. Often contrasted with explicit
memory. (Ch. 7)
inattentional blindness A pattern in which perceivers seem literally not to
see stimuli right in front of their eyes, this pattern is caused by the
participants focusing their attention on some other stimulus and not
expecting the target to appear. (Ch. 5)
incidental learning Learning that takes place in the absence of any intention
to learn and, correspondingly, in the absence of any expectation of a
subsequent memory test. Often contrasted with intentional learning. (Ch.
6)
incubation The second in a series of stages that are often hypothesized as
crucial for creativity. The first stage is preparation, the third,
illumination, the fourth, verification. Incubation is hypothesized to
involve events that occur when a person puts a problem out of their
conscious thoughts but continues nonetheless to work on the problem
unconsciously. Many current psychologists are skeptical about this
process, and they propose alternative accounts for data that ostensibly
document incubation. (Ch. 13)
independent variable The factor that distinguishes the control and
experimental conditions, in most studies, the researcher hopes to learnwhether the independent variable has some impact. If it does, this impact
will emerge as a contrast between the experimental and the control
conditions. In many studies, an independent variable has two “levels”—
absent (in the control condition) versus present (in the experimental
condition). The independent variable is also sometimes called the
“predictor variable” because the study is asking, in effect, whether we
can use this variable to predict the study’s outcome.
indirect memory testing A form of memory testing in which research
participants are not told that their memories are being tested. Instead,
they’re tested in such a way that previous experiences can influence
current behavior. Examples of indirect tests include word-stem
completion, the lexical-decision task, and tachistoscopic recognition.
Often contrasted with direct memory testing. (Ch. 7)
induction A pattern of reasoning in which a person seeks to draw general
claims from specific bits of evidence. Often contrasted with deduction.
(Ch. 12)
inhibitory connection A link from one node, or one detector, to another,
such that activation of one node decreases the activation level of the
other. Often contrasted with excitatory connection. (Ch. 4)
inspection time The time a person needs to make a simple discrimination
between two stimuli, used in some settings as a measure of mental speed,
and then used as a way to test the claim that intelligent people literally
are capable of faster processing in their brains. (Ch. 14)
integrative agnosia A disorder caused by a specific form of damage to the
parietal lobe, people with this disorder appear relatively normal in tasks
requiring them to detect whether specific features are present in a
display, but they are impaired in tasks requiring them to judge how the
features are bound together to form complex objects.
intentional learning The acquisition of memories in a setting in which
people know that their memory for the information will be tested later.
Often contrasted with incidental learning. (Ch. 6)
interference theory The hypothesis that materials are lost from memory
because of interference from other materials that are also in memory.
Interference caused by materials learned prior to the learning episode is
called “proactive interference”, interference caused by materials learned
after the learning episode is called “retroactive interference.” (Ch. 8)interposition A monocular distance cue that relies on the fact that objects
farther away are blocked from view by closer objects that happen to be
in the viewer’s line of sight. (Ch. 3)
inter-rater reliability A measure of agreement among different judges, all
called on to evaluate some idea or product or behavior. If this form of
reliability is high, we know that the evaluations are neither arbitrary nor
idiosyncratic.
introspection The process through which one “looks within,” to observe and
record the contents of one’s own mental life. (Ch. 1)
intrusion error A memory error in which a person recalls elements that were
not part of the original episode. (Ch. 8)
invalid experiment An experimental procedure that for some reason does not
measure what it is intended to measure. Often, this is because the
experiment includes a confound.
invalid syllogisms A syllogism (such as a categorical syllogism, or a
syllogism built on a conditional statement) in which the conclusion is
not logically demanded by the premises. (Ch. 12)
inversion effect A pattern typically observed for faces in which the specific
face is much more difficult to recognize if the face is presented upside-
down, this effect is part of the evidence indicating that face recognition
relies on processes different from those involved in other forms of
recognition. (Ch. 4)
Korsakoff’s syndrome A clinical syndrome characterized primarily by
dense anterograde amnesia. Korsakoff’s syndrome is caused by damage
to specific brain regions, and it is often precipitated by a form of
malnutrition that is common among long-term alcoholics. (Ch. 7)
lateral fissure The separation dividing the frontal lobes on each side of the
brain from the temporal lobes. (Ch. 2)
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) An important way station in the thalamus
that is the first destination for visual information sent from the eyeball to
the brain. (Ch. 3)
lateral inhibition A pattern in which cells, when stimulated, inhibit the
activity of neighboring cells. In the visual system, lateral inhibition in the
optic nerve creates edge enhancement. (Ch. 3)late selection hypothesis A proposal that selective attention operates at a
late stage of processing, so that the unattended inputs receive
considerable analysis. (Ch. 5)
lens The transparent tissue located near the front of each eye that (together
with the cornea) plays an important role in focusing incoming light.
Muscles control the degree of curvature of the lens, allowing the eye to
form a sharp image on the retina. (Ch. 3)
lesion A specific area of tissue damage. (Ch. 2)
level of processing An assessment of how “deeply” newly learned materials
are engaged, shallow processing involves thinking only about the
material’s superficial traits, whereas deep processing involves thinking
about what the material means. Deep processing is typically associated
with a greater probability of remembering the now-processed
information. (Ch. 6)
lexical-decision task A test in which participants are shown strings of letters
and must indicate, as quickly as possible, whether or not each string of
letters is a word in their language. It is proposed that people perform this
task by “looking up” these strings in their “mental dictionary.” (Ch. 7)
limbic system A set of brain structures including the amygdala,
hippocampus, and parts of the thalamus. The limbic system is believed
to be involved in the control of emotional behavior and motivation, and it
also plays a key role in learning and memory. (Ch. 2)
limited-capacity system A group of processes in which mental resources
are limited, so that extra resources supplied to one process must be
balanced by a withdrawal of resources somewhere else—with the result
that the total resources expended do not exceed the limit of what is
available. (Ch. 5)
linear perspective A cue for distance based on the fact that parallel lines
seem to converge as they get farther away from the viewer. (Ch. 3)
linguistic relativity The proposal that the language people speak shapes their
thought, because the structure and vocabulary of their language create
certain ways of thinking about the world. (Ch. 10)
localization of function The research endeavor of determining what specific
job is performed by a particular region of the brain. (Ch. 2)local representation A mode of representation in which information is
encoded in a small number of identifiable nodes. Local representations
are sometimes spoken of as “one idea per node” or “one content per
location.” Often contrasted with distributed representation. (Ch. 4)
longitudinal fissure The separation dividing the brain’s left cerebral
hemisphere from the right. (Ch. 2)
long-term memory (LTM) The storage system in which we hold all of our
knowledge and all of our memories. Long-term memory contains
memories that are not currently activated, those that are activated are
represented in working memory. (Ch. 6)
Mach band A type of illusion in which one perceives a region to be slightly
darker if it is adjacent to a bright region, and also perceives a region to
be slightly brighter if it is adjacent to a dark region. This illusion, created
by lateral inhibition, contributes to edge enhancement. (Ch. 3)
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI scan) A neuroimaging technique that
uses magnetic fields (created by radio waves) to construct a detailed
three-dimensional representation of brain tissue. Like CT scans, MRI
scans reveal the brain’s anatomy, but they are much more precise than CT
scans. (Ch. 2)
maintenance rehearsal A rote, mechanical process in which items are
continually cycled through working memory, merely by being repeated
over and over. Often contrasted with relational (or elaborative)
rehearsal. (Ch. 6)
manner of production The way in which a speaker momentarily obstructs
the flow of air out of the lungs to produce a speech sound. For example,
the airflow can be fully stopped for a moment, as in the [t] or [b] sound,
or the air can continue to flow, as in the pronunciation of [f] or [v]. (Ch.
10)
mapping The process of figuring out how aspects of one situation or
argument correspond to aspects of some other situation or argument, this
process is crucial for a problem solver’s ability to find and use
analogies. (Ch. 13)
mask A visual presentation that is used to interrupt the processing of another
visual stimulus. (Ch. 4)means-end analysis A strategy used in problem solving in which the person
is guided, step by step, by the difference between the current state and the
goal state, and by asking what operations are available for reducing that
difference. (Ch. 13)
memory rehearsal Any mental activity that has the effect of maintaining
information in working memory. Two types of rehearsal are often
distinguished: maintenance rehearsal and relational (or elaborative)
rehearsal. (Ch. 6)
mental resources Some process or capacity needed for performance, but in
limited supply. (Ch. 5)
mental rotation task An experimental procedure in which participants have
to determine whether a shape differs from a target only in its position and
orientation or whether the shape has a form different from the shape of
the target. (Ch. 11)
metacognitive skills Skills that allow people to monitor and control their
own mental processes. (Ch. 15)
metalinguistic judgments Cases in which people are asked to assess or
evaluate language, as opposed to using language as they ordinarily
would. For example, if asked to assess grammaticality (“Is ‘The elephant
trampled flowers the’ a grammatical sentence?”), people would be
making a metalinguistic judgment.
metamemory People’s knowledge about, awareness of, and control over
their own memory. (Ch. 15)
midbrain One of the three main structures (along with the forebrain and the
hindbrain) of the brain, the midbrain plays an important role in
coordinating movements, and it contains structures that serve as “relay”
stations for information arriving from the sensory organs. (Ch. 2)
mind-body problem The difficulty in understanding how the mind (a
nonphysical entity) and the body (a physical entity) can influence each
other, so that physical events can cause mental events, and mental events
can cause physical ones. (Ch. 15)
misinformation effect An effect in which reports about an earlier event are
influenced by misinformation that the person received after experiencing
the event. In the extreme, misinformation can be used to create false
memories concerning an entire event that actually never occurred. (Ch. 8)mnemonic strategies Techniques designed to improve memory accuracy and
to make learning easier, in general, mnemonic strategies seek to help
memory by imposing an organization on the materials to be learned. (Ch.
6)
modal model A nickname for a specific conception of the “architecture” of
memory. In this model, working memory serves both as the storage site
for material now being contemplated and as the “loading dock” for long-
term memory. Information can reach working memory through the
processes of perception, or it can be drawn from long-term memory.
Once in working memory, material can be further processed or can
simply be recycled for subsequent use. This model prompted a large
quantity of valuable research, but it has now largely been set aside, with
modern theorizing offering a very different conception of working
memory. (Ch. 6)
monocular distance cues Features of the visual stimulus that indicate
distance even if the stimulus is viewed with only one eye. (Ch. 3)
morpheme The smallest language unit that carries meaning. Psycholinguists
distinguish content (or “free”) morphemes (the primary carriers of
meaning) from function (or “bound”) morphemes (which specify the
relations among words). (Ch. 10)
motion parallax A distance cue based on the fact that as an observer moves,
the retinal images of nearby objects move more rapidly than do the
retinal images of objects farther away. (Ch. 3)
myelin sheath The layer of tissue, formed by specialized glial cells, that
provides insulation around the axons of many neurons. There are,
however, gaps in this insulation, and the neuronal signal essentially has to
“jump” from one gap to the next, dramatically increasing the speed of
neurotransmission. (Ch. 2)
N The conventional abbreviation for the total number of participants in a
study or, in some circumstances, the total number of participants in a
particular condition.
Necker cube One of the classic reversible (or ambiguous) figures, the
figure is a two-dimensional drawing that can be perceived as a cube
viewed from above or as a cube viewed from below. (Ch. 3)neural correlates of consciousness Events in the nervous system that occur
at the same time as, and may be the biological basis of, a specific mental
event or state. (Ch. 15)
neural synchrony A pattern of firing by neurons in which neurons in one
brain area fire at the same time as neurons in another area, the brain
seems to use this pattern as an indication that the neurons in different
areas are firing in response to the same stimulus. (Ch. 3)
neuroimaging techniques Non-invasive methods for examining either the
structure or the activation pattern within a living brain. (Ch. 1, Ch. 2.)
neuron An individual cell within the nervous system. (Ch. 2)
neuronal workspace hypothesis A specific claim about how the brain
makes conscious experience possible, the proposal is that “workspace
neurons” link together the activity of various specialized brain areas, and
this linkage makes possible integration and comparison of different types
of information. (Ch. 15)
neurotransmitter One of the chemicals released by neurons to stimulate
adjacent neurons. See also synapse. (Ch. 2)
node An individual unit within an associative network. In a scheme using
local representations, nodes represent single ideas or concepts. In a
scheme using distributed representations, ideas or concepts are
represented by a pattern of activation across a wide number of nodes, the
same nodes may also participate in other patterns and therefore in other
representations. (Ch. 7)
nonfluent aphasia A disruption of language, caused by brain damage, in
which a person loses the ability to speak or write with any fluency. Often
contrasted with fluent aphasia. (Ch. 10)
occipital lobes The rearmost lobe in each cerebral hemisphere, and the one
that includes the primary visual projection area. (Ch. 2)
operation span A measure of working memory’s capacity. This measure
turns out to be predictive of performance in many other tasks, presumably
because these tasks all rely on working memory. This measure is also the
modern replacement for the (less useful) measure obtained from the
digit-span task. (Ch. 6)
optic flow The pattern of change in the retinal image in which the image
grows larger as the viewer approaches an object and shrinks as theviewer retreats from it. (Ch. 3)
optic nerve The bundle of nerve fibers, formed from the retina’s ganglion
cells, that carries information from the eyeball to the brain. (Ch. 3)
overregularization error In speech production, an error in which a person
produces a form that is consistent with a broad pattern, even though that
pattern does not apply to the current utterance. Examples would include
uttering the word “foots” (applying the general pattern for plurals to the
word “foot”) or uttering the word “runned” (applying the general pattern
for the past tense to the word “run”). Alternatively, in perception or in
memory, an error in which someone perceives or remembers a word or
event as being closer to the “norm” than it really is. For example,
misspelled words are read as though they were spelled correctly,
atypical events are misremembered in a way that brings them closer to
more-typical events. (Ch. 10)
parallel distributed processing (PDP) A system of handling information in
which many steps happen at once (i.e., in parallel) and in which various
aspects of the problem or task are represented only in a distributed way.
(Ch. 9)
parallel processing A system in which many steps are going on at the same
time. Usually contrasted with serial processing. (Ch. 3)
parietal lobes The lobe in each cerebral hemisphere that lies between the
occipital and frontal lobes and that includes some of the primary
sensory projection areas, as well as circuits that are crucial for the
control of attention. (Ch. 2)
parse To divide an input into its appropriate elements—for example,
dividing the stream of incoming speech into its constituent words—or a
sequence of words into its constituent phrases. In some settings, parsing
also includes the additional step of determining each element’s role
within the sequence. (Ch. 10)
peer-review process A key step of quality control used in almost all
sciences. This process is typically linked to publication in one of the
field’s specialized journals. Before an article is published, the editor
solicits an evaluation of the article from scientists who know the material
(the methods, the background) just as well as the paper’s authors do.
These people are therefore the author’s “peers,” and their evaluation
guides the editor in deciding whether a paper should be published or not.Generally, a paper is published only if the peers find no flaws and no
problems, and, in turn, a paper is taken seriously by other scientists only
if it is published (and therefore has passed this test).
peg-word system A type of mnemonic strategy using words or locations as
“pegs” on which to “hang” the materials to be remembered. (Ch. 6)
percepts Internal representations of the world that result from perceiving,
percepts are organized depictions. (Ch. 11)
perceptual constancy The achievement of perceiving the constant properties
of objects in the world (e.g., their size, shape, and color) despite changes
in the sensory information we receive that are caused by changes in our
viewing circumstances. (Ch. 3)
perseveration error A pattern of responding in which a person produces the
same response over and over, even though the person knows that the task
requires a change in response. This pattern is often observed in patients
with brain damage in the frontal lobe. (Ch. 5)
phoneme A unit of sound that distinguishes one word (or one morpheme)
from another. For example, the words “peg” and “beg” differ in their
initial phoneme—[p] in one case, [b] in the other. Some contrasts in
sound, however, do not involve phonemes, these contrasts might indicate
the speaker’s emphasis or might involve a regional accent, but they do
not change the identity of the words being spoken. (These contrasts are
sometimes said to be “subphonemic.”) (Ch. 10)
phonemic restoration effect A pattern in which people “hear” phonemes
that actually are not presented but that are highly likely in that context.
For example, if one is presented with the word “legislature” but with the
[s] sound replaced by a cough, one is likely to hear the [s] sound anyhow.
(Ch. 10)
phonological buffer A passive storage system used for holding a
representation (essentially an “internal echo”) of recently heard or self-
produced sounds. (Ch. 6)
photoreceptors Cells on the retina that are sensitive to light and that
respond (i.e., send a signal to adjacent cells) when they are stimulated by
light. (Ch. 3)
phrase-structure rules Constraints that govern what elements must be
contained within a phrase and, in many languages, what the sequence ofthose elements must be. (Ch. 10)
pictorial cues Patterns that can be represented on a flat surface to create the
sense of a three- dimensional object or scene. (Ch. 3)
place of articulation The position at which a speaker momentarily obstructs
the flow of air out of the lungs to produce a speech sound. For example,
the place of articulation for the [b] sound is the lips, the place of
articulation for the [d] sound is where the tongue briefly touches the roof
of the mouth. (Ch. 10)
population The entire group about which an investigator wants to draw
conclusions.
positron emission tomography (PET scan) A neuroimaging technique that
determines how much glucose (the brain’s fuel) is being used by specific
areas of the brain at a particular moment in time. (Ch. 2)
postsynaptic membrane The cell membrane of the neuron “receiving”
information across the synapse. Often contrasted with presynaptic
membrane. (Ch. 2)
practical intelligence The ability to solve everyday problems through
skilled reasoning that relies on tacit knowledge acquired through
experience. (Ch. 14)
pragmatic rules Principles describing how language is ordinarily used,
listeners rely on these principles to guide their interpretation of what they
hear. For example, listeners rely on these rules when they interpret the
question “Can you pass me the salt?” as a request for the salt, not an
inquiry about someone’s arm strength. (Ch. 10)
predictive validity An assessment of whether a test measures what it is
intended to measure, based on whether the test scores correlate with (i.e.,
can predict) some other relevant criterion. (Ch. 14)
prefrontal cortex The outer surface (cortex) of the frontmost part of the
brain (i.e., the frontmost part of the frontal lobe). The prefrontal cortex
has many functions but is crucial for the planning of complex or novel
behaviors, so this brain area is often mentioned as one of the main sites
underlying the brain’s executive functions. (Ch. 2)
premises The assertions used as the starting point for a logical argument. The
premises may or may not be true, logic is concerned instead only with
whether a conclusion follows from the premises. (Ch. 12)preparation In problem solving, the first in a series of stages often
hypothesized as crucial for creativity. The second stage is incubation, the
third, illumination, the fourth, verification. Preparation is the stage in
which one begins effortful work on the problem, often with little
progress. (Ch. 13)
prescriptive rules Rules describing how things are supposed to be instead of
how they are. Often called “normative rules” and contrasted with
descriptive rules. (Ch. 10)
presynaptic membrane The cell membrane of the neuron “sending”
information across the synapse. Often contrasted with postsynaptic
membrane. (Ch. 2)
primacy effect An often-observed advantage in remembering the early-
presented materials within a sequence of materials. This advantage is
generally attributed to the fact that research participants can focus their
full attention on these items because, at the beginning of a sequence, the
participants are not trying to divide attention between these items and
other items in the series. Often contrasted with the recency effect. (Ch. 6)
primary motor projection area The strip of tissue, located at the rear of the
frontal lobe, that is the departure point for nerve cells that send their
signals to lower portions of the brain and spinal cord, and that ultimately
result in muscle movement. (Ch. 2)
primary sensory projection area The main point of arrival in the cortex for
information arriving from the eyes, ears, and other sense organs. (Ch. 2)
priming A process through which one input or cue prepares a person for an
upcoming input or cue. (Ch. 4)
problem solving A process in which a person begins with a goal and seeks
some steps that will lead toward that goal. (Ch. 13)
problem-solving set The starting assumptions that a person uses when trying
to solve a new problem. These assumptions are often helpful, because
they guide the person away from pointless strategies. But these
assumptions can sometimes steer the person away from worthwhile
strategies, in which case they can be an obstacle to problem solving. (Ch.
13)
problem space The set of all states that can be reached in solving a problem,
as the problem solver moves, by means of the problem’s operations, fromthe problem’s initial state toward its goal state. (Ch. 13)
processing fluency The speed or ease of processing involved in recognizing
or thinking about a stimulus or idea, usually understood as a reflection of
the speed or ease with which activation moves through a processing
pathway. (Ch. 7)
processing pathway The sequence of nodes and connections between nodes
through which activation flows when recognizing or thinking about a
stimulus or idea. The speed or ease of activation flow is referred to as
processing fluency. (Ch. 7)
production task An experimental procedure used in studying concepts, in
which the participant is asked to name as many examples (e.g., as many
fruits) as possible. (Ch. 9)
propositions The smallest unit of knowledge that can be either true or false.
Propositions are often expressed via simple sentences, but this is merely
a convenience, other modes of representation are available. (Ch. 9)
prosody The pattern of pauses and pitch changes that characterize speech
production. Prosody can be used (among other functions) to emphasize
elements of a spoken sentence, to highlight the sentence’s intended
structure, or to signal the difference between a question and an assertion.
(Ch. 10)
prosopagnosia A syndrome in which individuals lose their ability to
recognize faces and to make other fine-grained discriminations within a
highly familiar category, even though their other visual abilities seem
intact. (Ch. 4)
prototype A single “best example,” or average, identifying the “center” of a
category. (Ch. 9)
qualia (sing. quale) The subjective conscious experiences, or “raw
feelings,” of awareness. Examples include the pain of a headache and the
exact flavor of chocolate. (Ch. 15)
r The numerical value used in assessing a correlation, varying from –1.00 (a
perfect inverse correlation) to +1.00 (a perfect correlation).
r2 The numerical value calculated by multiplying r by itself (that is, by
squaring r). This value tells you how much of the overall variation in one
measure can be predicted, based on some second (predictor) measure.
Equivalently, this value tells you how much your uncertainty about thefirst measure is reduced if you also have access to a second measure that
predicts the first. If the second measure provides no basis for prediction,
then r2 is zero. If the second measure perfectly predicts the target value,
then r2 is 1.0.
random assignment A procedural step in which participants are assigned
randomly (perhaps through a coin toss) to one condition of a study or
another. This step ensures that there are no consistent or systematic
differences between the participant groups in the two conditions.
random sampling A procedure in which every member of the population
being studied has an equal chance of being picked for inclusion in the
data collection.
rating task A task in which research participants must evaluate some item or
category with reference to some dimension, usually expressing their
response in terms of some number. For example, they might be asked to
evaluate birds for how typical they are within the category “birds,” using
a “1” response to indicate “very typical” and a “7” response to indicate
“very atypical.” (Ch. 9)
reason-based choice A proposal for how people make decisions. The
central idea is that people make a choice when—and only when—they
detect what they believe to be a persuasive reason for making that choice.
(Ch. 12)
recall The task of memory retrieval in which the rememberer must come up
with the desired materials, sometimes in response to a cue that names the
context in which these materials were earlier encountered (e.g., “Name
the pictures you saw earlier”), and sometimes in response to a cue that
broadly identifies the sought-after information (e.g., “Name a fruit” or
“What is the capital of California?”). Often contrasted with recognition.
(Ch. 7)
recency One of the central influences on a detector’s or node’s activation
level. Recency refers to whether the detector or node has been activated
in the recent past. Often contrasted with frequency—whether the detector
or node has been activated often in the past. Note that this usage of
“recency” contrasts with the usage of “recency” within the term “recency
effect” (a memory advantage for some types of material).recency effect The tendency to remember materials that occur late in a
series. If the series was just presented, the recency effect can be
attributed to the fact that the late-arriving items are still in working
memory (because nothing else has arrived after these items to bump them
out of working memory). Often contrasted with the primacy effect. (Ch.
6)
receptive field The portion of the visual field to which a cell within the
visual system responds. If the appropriately shaped stimulus appears in
the appropriate position, the cell’s firing rate will change. The firing rate
will not change if the stimulus is of the wrong form or is in the wrong
position. (Ch. 3)
recognition The task of memory retrieval in which the items to be
remembered are presented and the person must decide whether or not the
item was encountered in some earlier circumstance. For example, one
might be asked, “Have you ever seen this person before?” or “Is this the
poster you saw in the office yesterday?” Often contrasted with recall.
(Ch. 7)
recognition by components (RBC) model A model of object recognition. In
this model, a crucial role is played by geons, the (hypothesized) basic
building blocks out of which all the objects we recognize are
constructed. (Ch. 4)
relational (or elaborative) rehearsal A form of mental processing in which
one thinks about the relations, or connections, among ideas. The
connections created (or strengthened) in this way will later guide
memory search. (Ch. 6)
reliability The degree of consistency with which a test measures a trait or
attribute. See also test-retest reliability. (Ch. 14)
“remember/know” distinction A distinction between two experiences a
person can have in recalling a past event. If you “remember” having
encountered a stimulus before, then you usually can offer information
about that encounter, including when, where, and how it occurred. If you
merely “know” that you encountered a stimulus before, then you’re likely
to have a sense of familiarity with the stimulus but may have no idea
when or where it was last encountered. (Ch. 7)
repetition priming A pattern of priming that occurs simply because a
stimulus is presented a second time, processing is more efficient on thesecond presentation. (Ch. 4)
replication A re-running of a study in order to ask whether the results are
reliable (i.e., emerge in the subsequent running of the study just as they
did in the first). In a “direct” replication, the researchers repeat the
earlier experiment with no changes. In a “conceptual” replication, the
researchers use a slightly different procedure to test the hypothesis or
confirm the initial result.
representativeness heuristic A strategy that is often used in making
judgments about categories. This strategy is broadly equivalent to making
the assumption that, in general, the instances of a category will resemble
the prototype for that category and, likewise, that the prototype resembles
each instance. (Ch. 12)
response threshold The quantity of information or activation needed to
trigger a response in a node or detector, or, in a neuroscience context, a
response from a neuron. (Ch. 4)
response time (RT) The amount of time (usually measured in milliseconds)
needed for a person to respond to a particular event (such as a question
or a cue to press a specific button). (Ch. 1)
retention interval The amount of time that passes between the initial
learning of some material and the subsequent memory retrieval of that
material. (Ch. 8)
retina The light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eyeball. (Ch. 3)
retrieval The process of locating information in memory and activating that
information for use. (Ch. 6)
retrieval failure A mechanism that probably contributes to a great deal of
forgetting. Retrieval failure occurs when a memory is, in fact, in long-
term storage but the person is unable to locate that memory when trying to
retrieve it. (Ch. 8)
retrieval paths A connection (or series of connections) that can lead to a
sought-after memory in long-term storage. (Ch. 6)
retrograde amnesia An inability to remember experiences that occurred
before the event that triggered the memory disruption. Often contrasted
with anterograde amnesia. (Ch. 7)
reversible (or ambiguous) figure Drawings that can be readily perceived in
more than one way. Classic examples include the vase/profiles, theduck/rabbit, and the Necker cube. (Ch. 3)
risk aversion A tendency toward avoiding risk. People tend to be risk averse
when contemplating gains, choosing instead to hold tight to what they
already have. Often contrasted with risk seeking. (Ch. 12)
risk seeking A tendency toward seeking out risk. People tend to be risk
seeking when contemplating losses, presumably because they’re willing
to gamble in hopes of avoiding (or diminishing) their losses. Often
contrasted with risk aversion. (Ch. 12)
rodsPhotoreceptors that are sensitive to very low light levels but that are
unable to discriminate hues and that have relatively poor acuity. Often
contrasted with cones. (Ch. 3)
sample The subset of the population that an investigator studies to learn
about the population at large.
savant syndrome A pattern of traits in a disabled person such that the person
has some remarkable talent that contrasts with their very low level of
general intelligence. (Ch. 14)
schema Knowledge describing what is typical or frequent in a particular
situation. For example, a “kitchen schema” would stipulate that a stove
and refrigerator are likely to be present, whereas a coffeemaker may be
or may not be present, and a piano is not likely to be present. (Ch. 8)
selection task An experimental procedure, commonly used to study
reasoning, in which a person is presented with four cards with certain
information on either side of the card. The person is also given a rule that
may describe the cards, and the person’s task is to decide which cards
must be turned over to find out if the rule describes the cards or not. Also
called the four-card task. (Ch. 12)
selective attention The skill through which a person focuses on one input or
one task while ignoring other stimuli that are also on the scene. (Ch. 5)
self-report data A form of evidence in which a person is asked directly
about their own thoughts or experiences. (Ch. 11)
self-schema The set of interwoven beliefs and memories that constitute one’s
knowledge about oneself.
self-selected group A comparison in which research participants decide for
themselves which condition of the study they will be in (e.g., the control
condition or the experimental condition). This situation is likely tocause concern about a third-variable problem because presumably
participants choose one condition or another for some reason—some
preference or trait or inclination that the participants have prior to the
study. The concern, then, is that the preexisting preference or trait, and
not the independent variable, might be causing the difference observed
in the dependent variable.
semantic priming A process in which activation of an idea in memory
causes activation to spread to other ideas related to the first in meaning.
(Ch. 7)
sensory memory A form of memory that holds on to just-seen or just-heard
input in a “raw” sensory form. (Ch. 6)
sentence A sequence of words that conforms to the rules of syntax (and so
has the right constituents in the right sequence). (Ch. 10)
sentence verification task An experimental procedure used for studying
memory in which participants are given simple sentences (e.g., “Cats are
animals”) and must respond as quickly as possible whether the sentence
is true or false. (Ch. 9)
serial position A data pattern summarizing the relationship between some
performance measure (often, likelihood of recall) and the order in which
the test materials were presented (i.e., where the materials were located
within the series). In memory studies, the serial-position curve tends to
be U-shaped, with people being best able to recall the first-presented
items (the primacy effect) and also the last-presented items (the recency
effect). (Ch. 6)
serial processing A system in which only one step happens at a time (and so
the steps occur in a series). Usually contrasted with parallel processing.
(Ch. 3)
shadowing A task in which research participants repeat back a verbal input,
word for word, as they hear it. (Ch. 5)
shallow processing A mode of thinking about material in which one pays
attention only to appearances and other superficial aspects of the
material, shallow processing typically leads to poor memory retention.
Often contrasted with deep processing. (Ch. 6)
shape constancy The achievement of perceiving the constant shape of
objects despite changes in the shape of the retinal image that result fromvariations in viewing angle. (Ch. 3)
short-term memory An older term for what is now called working memory.
(Ch. 6)
single-cell recording A technique for recording the moment-by-moment
activation level of an individual neuron within a healthy, normally
functioning brain. (Ch. 3)
size constancy The achievement of perceiving the constant size of objects
despite changes in the size of the retinal image that result from variations
in viewing distance. (Ch. 3)
somatic markers States of the body used in decision making. For example, a
tight stomach and an accelerated heart rate when a person is thinking
about a particular option can signal to the person that the option has risk
associated with it. (Ch. 12)
source confusion A memory error in which one misremembers where a bit
of information was learned or where a particular stimulus was last
encountered. (Ch. 7)
source memory A form of memory that enables a person to recollect the
episode in which learning took place or the time and place in which a
particular stimulus was encountered. (Ch. 7)
spatial attention The mechanism through which people allocate processing
resources to particular positions in space, so that they more efficiently
process any inputs from that region in space. (Ch. 5)
specific-language impairment (SLI) A disorder in which individuals seem
to have normal intelligence but experience problems in learning the rules
of language. (Ch. 10)
speech segmentation The process through which a stream of speech is
“sliced” into its constituent words and, within words, into the constituent
phonemes. (Ch. 10)
spreading activation A process through which activation travels from one
node to another, via associative links. As each node becomes activated,
it serves as a source for further activation, spreading onward through the
network. (Ch. 7)
stereotype threat A mechanism through which a person’s performance is
influenced by the perception that their score will confirm stereotypes
about their group. (Ch. 14)storage The state in which a memory, once acquired, remains until it is
retrieved. Many people understand storage to be a “dormant” process, so
that the memory remains unchanged while it is in storage. Modern
theories, however, describe a more dynamic form of storage, in which
older memories are integrated with (and sometimes replaced by) newer
knowledge. (Ch. 6)
Stroop interference A classic demonstration of automaticity in which
research participants are asked to name the color of ink used to print a
word, and the word itself is the name of a different color. For example,
participants might see the word “YELLOW” printed in blue ink and be
required to say “blue.” Considerable interference is observed in this
task, with participants apparently being unable to ignore the word’s
content even though it is irrelevant to their task. (Ch. 5)
subcortical structures Identified pieces of the brain that are underneath the
cortex and therefore are hidden from view in drawings of an intact brain.
These structures include the thalamus, the hypothalamus, and the various
components of the limbic system. (Ch. 2)
subliminal perception A pattern in which people perceive and are in some
ways influenced by inputs they did not consciously notice. (Ch. 15)
subthreshold activationActivation levels below response threshold.
Subthreshold activation, by definition, will not trigger a response,
nonetheless, this activation is important because it can accumulate,
leading eventually to an activation level that reaches (or exceeds) the
response threshold. (Ch. 7)
subvocalization Covert speech in which one goes through the motions of
speaking, or perhaps forms a detailed motor plan for speech movements,
but without making any sound. (Ch. 6)
summation The addition of two or more separate inputs so that the effect of
the combined inputs is greater than the effect of any one input by itself.
(Ch. 7)
synapse The area that includes the presynaptic membrane of one neuron, the
postsynaptic membrane of another neuron, and the tiny gap between
them. The presynaptic membrane releases a small amount of
neurotransmitter that drifts across the gap and stimulates the
postsynaptic membrane. (Ch. 2)syntax Rules governing the sequences and combinations of words in the
formation of phrases and sentences. (Ch. 10)
systematic data collection A pattern of recording and collecting data for a
study in which all of the evidence is collected, or, at least, in which
evidence is collected in a way that is independent of the hypothesis being
considered.
tachistoscope A device that allows the presentation of stimuli for precisely
controlled amounts of time, including very brief presentations. (Ch. 4)
temporal lobes The lobe of the cortex lying inward and down from the
temples. The temporal lobe in each cerebral hemisphere includes the
primary auditory projection area, Wernicke’s area, and, subcortically, the
amygdala and hippocampus. (Ch. 2)
testable hypothesis A supposition about the facts that may or may not turn
out to be true, but that is stated in a way that allows unambiguous testing
—that is, it allows a persuasive determination of whether the supposition
is true.
test-retest reliability An assessment of whether a test is consistent in what it
measures from one occasion to another, determined by asking whether the
test’s results on one occasion are correlated with results from the same
test (or a close variant on it) given at a later time. (Ch. 14)
thalamus A part of the lower portion of the forebrain that serves as a major
relay and integration center for sensory information. (Ch. 2)
theory of multiple intelligences A proposal that there are many forms of
intelligence, including linguistic, spatial, musical, bodily-kinesthetic, and
personal. (Ch. 14)
third-variable problem A concern that arises when two variables (say: X
and Y) are correlated. In such cases, there is likely to be some ambiguity
about whether X causes Y or Y causes X. But, in addition, it is possible
that neither of these variables causes the other. Instead, X and Y might be
correlated because both are the result of some other factor (the “third
variable”). An example might be taking Latin in high school and doing
well in college. Here, the third variable might be “being academically
serious and ambitious,” which both leads a student to study Latin in high
school and also enables the student to do well in college.threshold The activity level at which a cell or detector responds, or fires.
(Ch. 2)
top-down processing A sequence of events that is heavily shaped by the
knowledge and expectations that the person brings to the situation. Often
contrasted with bottom-up processing. (Ch. 4)
TOT phenomenon An often-observed effect in which people are unable to
remember a particular word, even though they are certain that the word
(typically identified via its definition) is in their vocabulary. People in
this state often can remember the starting letter for the word and its
number of syllables, and they insist that the word is on the “tip of their
tongue” (therefore, the “TOT” label). (Ch. 8)
transcendental method A type of theorizing proposed by the philosopher
Immanuel Kant. To use this method, an investigator first observes the
effects or consequences of a process and then asks: What must the
process have been to bring about these effects? (Ch. 1)
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) A technique in which a series of
strong magnetic pulses at a specific location on the scalp causes
temporary disruption in the brain region directly underneath this scalp
area. (Ch. 2)
tree structure A style of depiction often used to indicate hierarchical
relationships, such as the relationships (specified by phrase-structure
rules) among the words in a phrase or sentence. (Ch. 10)
Type 1 thinking A commonly used name for judgment and reasoning
strategies that are fast and effortless, but prone to error. (Ch. 12)
Type 2 thinking A commonly used name for judgment and reasoning
strategies that are slower and require more effort than Type 1 thinking.
(Ch. 12)
typicality The degree to which a particular case (an object, situation, or
event) is typical for its kind. (Ch. 9)
unattended channel A stimulus (or group of stimuli) that a person is not
trying to perceive. Ordinarily, little information is understood or
remembered from the unattended channel. Often contrasted with attended
channel. (Ch. 5)
unconscious inference The hypothesized steps that perceivers follow in
order to take one aspect of the visual scene (e.g., viewing distance) intoaccount in judging another aspect (e.g., size). (Ch. 3)
unilateral neglect syndrome A pattern of symptoms in which affected
individuals ignore all inputs coming from one side of space. Individuals
with this syndrome put only one of their arms into their jackets, eat food
from only half of their plates, read only half of words (e.g., they might
read “blouse” as “use”), and so on. (Ch. 2)
utility maximization The proposal that people make decisions by selecting
the option that has the greatest utility. (Ch. 12)
validity The extent to which a method or procedure measures what it is
supposed to measure. Validity is assessed in a variety of ways, including
through predictive validity. (Ch. 14)
valid syllogisms A syllogism for which the conclusion follows from the
premise, in accord with the rules of logic. (Ch. 12)
verification One of the four steps that are commonly hypothesized as part of
creative problem solving, in this step, the problem solver confirms that a
new idea really does lead to a problem solution, and then they work out
the details. (The other steps are preparation, incubation, and
illumination.) (Ch. 13)
viewpoint-dependent recognition A process in which the ease or success of
recognition depends on the perceiver’s particular viewing angle or
distance with regard to the target object.
viewpoint-independent recognition A process in which the ease or success
of recognition does not depend on the perceiver’s particular viewing
angle or distance with regard to the target object.
visual features The elements of a visual pattern—vertical lines, curves,
diagonals, and so on— that, together, form the overall pattern. (Ch. 3)
visual search task An often-used laboratory task in which research
participants are asked to search for a specific target (e.g., a shape, or a
shape of a certain color) within a field of other stimuli, usually, the
researcher is interested in how quickly the participants can locate the
target. (Ch. 4)
visuospatial buffer One of the low-level assistants used as part of the
working-memory system. This buffer plays an important role in storing
visual or spatial representations, including visual images.voicing One of the properties that distinguishes different categories of speech
sounds. A sound is considered “voiced” if the vocal folds are vibrating
while the sound is produced. If the vocal folds start vibrating sometime
after the sound begins (i.e., with a long voice-onset time), the sound is
considered “unvoiced.” (Ch. 10)
well-formedness A measure of the degree to which a string of symbols
(usually letters) conforms to the usual patterns (for letters: the rules of
spelling), for example, the nonword “FIKE” is well formed in English,
but “IEFK” is not. (Ch. 4)
Wernicke’s area An area in the temporal lobe of the brain, where the
temporal and parietal lobes meet, damage here typically causes fluent
aphasia. (Ch. 10)
what system The system of visual circuits and pathways leading from the
visual cortex to the temporal lobe and especially involved in object
recognition. Often contrasted with the where system. (Ch. 3)
where system The system of visual circuits and pathways leading from the
visual cortex to the parietal lobe and especially involved in the spatial
localization of objects and in the coordination of movements. Often
contrasted with the what system. (Ch. 3)
word-stem completion A task in which research participants are given the
beginning of a word (e.g., “TOM”) and must provide a word that starts
with the letters provided. In some versions of the task, only one solution
is possible, so performance is measured by counting the number of words
completed. In other versions of the task, several solutions are possible
for each stem, and performance is assessed by determining which
responses fulfill some other criterion. (Ch. 7)
word-superiority effect (WSE) The data pattern in which research
participants are more accurate and more efficient in recognizing letters if
the letters appear within a word (or a word-like letter string) than they
are in recognizing letters appearing in isolation. (Ch. 4)
working memory The storage system in which information is held while that
information is being worked on. All indications are that working memory
is a system, not a single entity, and that information is held here via active
processes, not via some sort of passive storage. Formerly called short-
term memory. (Ch. 6)working-memory capacity (WMC) A measure of working memory derived
from operation span tasks. Although termed a “memory capacity,” this
measure can perhaps best be understood as a measure of a person’s
ability to store some materials while simultaneously working with other
materials. (Ch. 6)
working-memory system A system of mental resources used for holding
information in an easily accessible form. The central executive is at the
heart of this system, and the executive then relies on a number of low-
level assistants, including the visuospatial buffer and the articulatory
rehearsal loop. (Ch. 6)